JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
the biggest test yet in the
Midwest for both
Republican and Democratic
candidates, as voters
in Michigan, along with three
other states,
decide.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: Vice
President Joe Biden tries to
mend relations
with Israel, one day after Prime
Minister
Netanyahu canceled his trip to
the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, a look at
what Washington
politicians could learn from
smaller cities,
and why communities in the
so-called flyover
states shouldn't be so easily
dismissed.
DEBORAH FALLOWS, "The Atlantic":
When we touched
down in some of these small
communities, you
would think, how can all this be
going on
here, and we never knew about
any of it?
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Four more states
are having
their say today in the
presidential race of
2016. Front-runners in both
parties, Donald
Trump and Hillary Clinton, are
working to
pad their delegate leads, while
rivals try
to gain a little ground or at
least hang on.
Michigan is the day's main
attraction, and
we will hear from a reporter on
the scene
after the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: An American
tourist was killed and a dozen
Israelis wounded
in a fresh wave of Palestinian
attacks. The
tourist, identified as a
Vanderbilt University
student, died in Jaffa, where an
assailant
stabbed seven people, before
being killed
by police.
Another Palestinian shot and
wounded several
people in Jerusalem. He, too,
was killed,
along with two others involved
in stabbing
incidents. We will take a closer
look at the
Israeli-Palestinian divide later
in the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iran's hard-line
Revolutionary
Guard has test-fired another
round of ballistic
missiles, challenging the United
Nations and
the United States.
Iranian state TV today showed a
medium-range
missile being launched
overnight. It said
several others were fired in
recent days.
U.S. officials said that could
violate a U.N.
prohibition.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
There's at least one specific
United Nations
Security Council resolution that
could apply
here, and the truth is, we're
still reviewing
the Iranian launch to assess
whether it is
necessary for this matter to be
raised before
the United Nations Security
Council.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.N.
resolution warns against
launching anything that can
carry a nuclear
warhead. In addition, the U.S.
announced sanctions
earlier this year after Iran
launched a long-range
missile last fall.
GWEN IFILL: South Korea today
imposed new
penalties on North Korea for
recent nuclear
and missile tests. The sanctions
ban financial
dealings with 40 individuals and
30 organizations
with suspected links to the
North's weapons
program.
In Seoul, a top official also
announced new
rules designed to cut off
traffic by sea.
LEE SUK-JOON, South Korean
Minister of Government
Policy Coordination (through
translator):
We will strengthen sanctions on
shipping related
to North Korea. We will entirely
ban foreign
vessels that are stopped in a
North Korean
port within 180 days and we will
also continue
the measures prohibiting the
vessels of third
countries from sailing the sea
route between
South and North Korea.
GWEN IFILL: In a related
development, South
Korea's spy agency accused North
Korea of
hacking the cell phones of
dozens of top South
Korean officials.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Somalia, the
Islamist group
Al-Shabaab confirms the U.S.
bombed one of
its camps on Saturday, but it
disputes claims
that the strike killed 150
fighters. American
officials say the coordinated
drone and manned
aircraft attacks hit a training
site 120 miles
north of Mogadishu. The Pentagon
says it was
aimed at preventing a
large-scale attack by
the militants.
GWEN IFILL: The European Union
moved closer
today to a deal to reverse the
exodus of migrants
from Turkey. In return, the
Turks would get
well over $6.5 billion in aid,
among other
things.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television
News reports from Greece, where
growing numbers
of migrants are stranded.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: There are now
around 14,000
people living like this in
Idomeni, and yet
the Greek authorities are
predicting even
more will now rush to join them
before any
deal sealed with Turkey at the
end of next
week seals them out of Europe as
well.
Over 700 migrants came ashore on
Greek islands
this morning alone. These
arrived on Lesbos,
with many more on the way,
adding to the 37,000
already in Greece. So it's no
wonder Turkey's
offer to take them all back
comes with strings
attached, chiefly, that one
Syrian should
be granted asylum in Europe for
every Syrian
returned across this water.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister: I
want to make it clear, we are
demanding fair
burden-sharing for Syrian
refugees.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Then there are
the unwritten
demands. At least one person was
killed today
by rockets fired into Turkey
from Syria, possibly
by so-called Islamic State.
Turkey expects not just
sympathy, but support,
above all in battling Kurdish
militancy along
this border. Human rights groups
will bridle
at that.
Where are you from?
TRAVELERS: Afghanistan.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: And they're
already bridling
at the prospect of people like
these Afghans
we encountered in Lesbos
yesterday being forcibly
returned, because their legal
rights to shelter
are so few on the Turkish side.
VINCENT COCHETEL, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Human Rights: An agreement
that would
be tantamount to a blanket
return of any foreigners
to a certain country is not
consistent with
European law, is not consistent
with international
law. Now, we need to see what
would be the
safeguards.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: These migrants
apparently
set to become part of the
biggest expulsion
of people since Greece and
Turkey were at
war.
GWEN IFILL: More than one
million people have
flooded into the E.U. since
early last year,
mainly by way of Turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Several major
corporate sponsors
cut or suspended ties today with
tennis star
Maria Sharapova. The five-time
Grand Slam
winner admitted Monday that she
tested positive
for a newly banned drug at the
Australian
Open. The drug, meldonium, can
improve endurance.
Sharapova says she's used it
periodically
over the past 10 years for
various medical
problems.
GWEN IFILL: And Wall Street gave
ground after
China announced its exports fell
in February
by the most in more than six
years. The Dow
Jones industrial average lost
nearly 110 points
to close at 16964. The Nasdaq
fell 59 points,
and the S&P 500 slipped 22.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how Michigan's
election affects the future of
the presidential
race; a renewed effort for peace
in Israel;
the launch of the new SAT test;
a journalist's
take on what motivates Americans
to jihad;
and much more.
take on what motivates Americans
to jihad;
and much more.
And now to politics.
Four states are holding contests
today, both
parties in Mississippi and
Michigan, plus
Republican races in Idaho and
Hawaii.
On the campaign trail,
Republican John Kasich
was in Michigan, drumming up
support for today's
primaries, while others, like
Ted Cruz, turned
their attention to states voting
next week.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
You know the whole country is
watching Michigan
now. The whole country is.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GOV. JOHN KASICH: And what
they're wondering,
what they're wondering, is a guy
who has labored
in obscurity rising in this
state? And can
a positive message of hope, of
opportunity,
of confidence, of innovation, of
youthfulness,
can somebody with that message
finally overcome
the bad mood that we seem to
have been in?
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
To all of you who are voting
today in states
across the country, who will be
voting in
a week, to all of the men and
women here in
North Carolina who may be
thinking of supporting
other candidates, I ask you,
come join us.
We welcome you with open arms.
If you don't
want to see Donald Trump as the
nominee, and
if you don't want to see Hillary
Clinton as
the president, which is the
inevitable result
of Donald Trump being the
nominee, come join
us. Let us stand together.
GWEN IFILL: The top prize for
both parties
tonight, Michigan. For some GOP
candidates
there, the fight for first is
almost as meaningful
as the fight for second place.
And for more on that, we're
joined by Kathy
Gray, political reporter for The
Detroit Free
Press.
Kathy, thank you for joining us.
In a nutshell, why is Michigan
so important
to these candidates?
KATHY GRAY, The Detroit Free
Press: Well,
it propels them into the next
states, Ohio,
Florida, the big states on
October (sic) 15.
And all of them are hoping that
they get some
big numbers here so they have
some momentum
going into those states.
GWEN IFILL: We have seen the
Trump steamroller
going through a lot of the early
primary states.
How is it going? How is it
rolling through
Michigan?
KATHY GRAY: Well, he has been
here twice.
He had big, big rallies in
Michigan, and all
the polls show him in the lead.
But some of the polls in more
recent days
have had the race tightening up
a little bit.
John Kasich seems to be rising a
little bit.
Ted Cruz is in second place.
Marco Rubio seems
to be kind of dropping off the
-- dropping
off the slate.
GWEN IFILL: Some of the early
exit polls which
are coming out tonight suggest
that voters
in Michigan are just as -- are
less angry
than voters in, say,
Mississippi, and that
they are more mainstream
perhaps. How does
that translate? Or does that
translate? Does
that match up with what you have
been seeing?
KATHY GRAY: Well, there is some
anger out
there, too. There are a lot of
people who
are either unemployed or
underemployed. There's
a lot of wage stagnation there,
so the message
that Donald Trump is sending has
kind of resonated
with people here in Michigan.
But there are wide swathes of
moderate voters,
moderate Republican voters and
independents
in the state as well, and those
are the folks
who John Kasich is hoping to
attract, and
he's been here almost nonstop
for the past
week.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
Ohio Governor
John Kasich, who is trying to
make a dent
in the Rust Belt somewhere.
Did he benefit at all from that
really raucous
debate last week where everybody
was throwing
mud and he was kind of trying to
rise above?
KATHY GRAY: I think he did.
A lot of people that I have
talked to, I have
been at several of Kasich's
event here's in
Michigan, have said that they
appreciated
a person who is a little less
blustery, a
little less fiery. And he seemed
to be kind
of the grownup on the stage, and
people in
Michigan who were tuning in very
much so to
the debate in Detroit I think
appreciated
that.
GWEN IFILL: One of the things we
have seen
in other states as well is that
a lot of early
voters, people who cast their
vote some time
in the past, came out for Trump,
but, in the
end, the turn was toward other
candidates,
even though not enough to
overtake the front-runner.
How has early voting been in
Michigan?
KATHY GRAY: It's been huge.
I just talked with the secretary
of state's
office late this afternoon, and
the absentee
ballots are up by -- it's going
close to 200,000
more than in 2012. Early voting,
we had a
poll last week, shows that the
early voting
is benefiting both Donald Trump
and Hillary
Clinton to a very large degree.
So the voter turnout on today is
going to
be key for the rest of the
candidates.
GWEN IFILL: You mentioned
Hillary Clinton.
It allows me to move to the
Democrats. There's
been a lot of discussion about
the situation
in Flint, the poisoned,
lead-taunted water
in Flint, Michigan. And of
course, there was
a Democratic debate there
recently.
How has that issue resonated,
either on the
Democratic side or on the
Republican side?
KATHY GRAY: It's really
resonated on the Democratic
side. Hillary Clinton was the
first one in
to call -- talk about it. She
talked about
it first at a debate way back in
January.
She came to -- she came to Flint
in early
February. She's been pounding on
it relentlessly
for the past couple of months.
Bernie Sanders
has also been to Flint. He came
and did a
town hall meeting in Flint. And
it is really
resonating.
It's kind of a narrative of how
inner cities,
inner urban cities have been
kind of left
behind by Republican policies,
and so they're
definitely playing big on that.
Flint also has a very large
African-American
population, so both of the
candidates have
been trying to attract those
voters as well.
GWEN IFILL: Let me try two
numbers on you.
This is on the Republican side,
delegate -- adding
up the delegates at stake.
Fifteen percent
is one number. Fifty percent is
the other.
Explain how that's going to play
out.
KATHY GRAY: Well, on the
Republican side,
we have 59 delegates at stake.
You have to
get at least 15 percent of the
vote to get
that. So there's a very real
possibility that
one of the Republicans won't
meet that threshold.
On the Democratic side, you have
to get -- it's
a winner -- it's a not a
winner-take-all.
It's proportional. There's 130
delegates at
stake, another 17
superdelegates. Those 130
are divided up proportionately.
And we expect
that both Clinton and Sanders
will get some
delegates out of Michigan.
GWEN IFILL: OK. Kathy Gray of
The Detroit
Free Press, thank you. Long
night ahead.
KATHY GRAY: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Get the latest on
the election
online. Check in with our
results page all
night. That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return to the
Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, and tonight begin a
series of occasional
conversations we're calling The
Long Divide.
Vice President Joe Biden was in
Israel today,
not far from the scene of one
stabbing attack,
where he began two days of
meetings with Israeli
and Palestinian leaders mired in
a deep and
violent impasse.
Biden is also the latest top
American official
trying to repair relations
between the Obama
White House and Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu.
We launch this series now with
New York Times
foreign affairs columnist Thomas
Friedman.
Tom Friedman, welcome back to
the program.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN, The New York
Times: Great
to be with you, Judy. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you wrote a
column saying
flatly that the peace process is
dead. Why
do you believe that?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Because it's
dead.
It's actually been dead for a
while. I just
called it by its real name. It's
clear to
me, Judy, that both sides have
conspired.
This was like "Murder on the
Orient Express."
There were so many stab wounds
in this body,
hard to tell exactly which one
was the fatal
blow.
But you now have near
approaching 500,000
Jewish settlers in the West
Bank, and depending
on where you define the border.
Remember,
it took 50,000 Israeli soldiers
and police
to remove peacefully 8,000
settlers from Gaza.
So, imagine if you're talking
about, you know,
400,000 to 500,000. And on the
Palestinian
side, you have had some really
bad developments.
In the last Israeli-Palestinian
war, Hamas
fired a rocket that landed
basically on the
outskirts of Israel's only
international airport,
basically, or major
Lod.
And the U.S. FAA ordered for one
day all American
flights canceled. That was a
message to all
Israelis. Imagine if the
Palestinians had
the West Bank and could close
their only airport.
And, also, Salam Fayyad or the
-- sorry -- the
-- Abu Mazen, the Palestinian
president, he
released -- he fired, basically,
Salam Fayyad,
the one Palestinian prime
minister who said,
we need to build our
institutions, and if
we do what the Zionists did and
we build our
state institutionally, getting a
state will
just be a formality.
He got fired.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying
there are
a few people trying to do the
right thing,
but they're not being listened
to? What's
the problem?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Yes. There are
a lot of people
trying to do the right -- wrong
thing, and
they have been really empowered
lately.
My criticism of Netanyahu is not
that Israel
should get out of the West Bank
tomorrow.
I get it. It's a dangerous
neighborhood. You
know, I have always felt, to
understand Israel,
to write about Israel, you have
to keep three
thoughts in your head at the
same time and
their intention.
One is that Israel is an amazing
place. It's
really built an amazing society
in its short
history. Second, Israel does
some bad stuff
in the West Bank. And, third,
Israel lives
in a really dangerous
neighborhood. And you
have got to keep all three of
those in your
head at the same time.
My critique of Netanyahu is
this. Why would
you make a bad situation worse
by putting
Jews in the middle of
Palestinian areas in
the West Bank, highly densely
populated Palestinian
areas, that if there were to be
a deal, that
would have to be ceded to a
Palestinian state?
And where is the Israeli
creativity? We see
Israeli creativity in cyber, in
technology,
all of these things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: When was the
last time you
read a story about Netanyahu
where you said,
wow, now, that's really
interesting, there's
a really creative idea?
And on the Palestinian side, you
have got
a fractured Palestinian society,
one in Gaza,
one in the West Bank. So nobody
can actually
say yes for the Palestinians
anymore in a
unified way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the meantime,
you have American
politicians, many Republican
prominent politicians
running for president who are
praising Benjamin
Netanyahu, saying Barack --
President Obama
has been -- has made all the
wrong moves when
it comes to Israel.
Is the U.S. a player or not?
There's a story
today in The Wall Street Journal
saying that
the White House is trying to
come up with
a U.N. resolution maybe or some
other gesture
to get the peace process moving
again.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Well, that
story is a bit
of an evergreen. Maybe it's true
now. But
it's always, we're going to tell
them. We're
just -- we're going to tell them
we're tired
of this. We're going to -- and
then it never
happens, because a Democrat
comes along, like
Hillary Clinton, and says, geez,
I wish you
wouldn't do that. Now that's
going to affect
Jewish voters.
What's going on in the campaign,
that's a
gravity-free zone. It has
nothing to do with
the reality of the Middle East
whatsoever.
That is people looking for votes
and funding.
It has nothing to do with the
region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of the
problem here,
Tom, is due to the fact that the
rest Middle
East is virtually on fire,
overshadowing the
Palestinians and the Israelis?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: There's no
question.
If you're sitting in Israel
today, Israel
has a real strategic dilemma. It
has nonstate
actors dressed as civilians,
armed with rockets,
nested among civilians on four
out of five
borders, Sinai, Gaza, Lebanon
and Syria.
I think we're at a stage today
where a lot
of artificial states, states
whose borders
are primarily straight lines,
they're actually
blowing up all over the world
under the pressure
of globalization, technology,
climate. It's
different things in different
places.
These states, Judy, they're like
caravan homes
in a trailer park. They're built
on slabs
of cement with no basement and
no foundation.
And these big global forces
today, they're
like a tornado going through a
trailer park.
And a lot of them happen to be
around Israel.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If solutions are
out there,
and the people who have tried to
float them
just get knocked down, where is
an answer
going to come from? You're
saying it waits
for the next president. Does it
wait even
longer? And where does it?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: You know,
Netanyahu and Abbas
can almost see each other from
their offices.
The idea that they need John
Kerry or any
American secretary of state to
come over,
if they had the will, they would
have the
way. It's got to start with
them. I think
the most constructive thing
President Obama
could do would -- say, we tried.
It's over.
There's going to be a one-state
solution.
That's what would shock the
system, not, here's
our plan. But then they just
start making
it about us. They start picking
apart our
plan. They say, it's about you.
It's over.
We really wish you well. Sorry
it didn't work
out, because what happens
otherwise is Netanyahu
will always say, Kerry's coming.
Kerry -- there's
a plan.
Or Abbas will say, don't worry.
The Americans
are -- no, no, nobody's coming.
It's over.
It's yours. You own it. Now you
live with
it. And that's the beginning of
wisdom.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But can any
American president
really do that, given the
political pressure
in this country?
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: Obama has sort
of been doing
it for the last year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he hasn't
made that declaration.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: He hasn't said
that. But
he's basically -- he's basically
told Kerry,
you know, I don't want you
messing around
there anymore.
So, it's very hard, but,
actually, it would
be -- you know, friends don't
let friends
drive drunk, and we have been
letting a lot
of people drive drunk.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tom Friedman, on
that note,
we thank you.
THOMAS FRIEDMAN: A pleasure,
Judy. Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: This past Saturday,
high school
students preparing for college
took a brand-new
SAT test, with the first major
changes in
more than a decade. The scores
will be part
of many college applications,
but not all.
April Brown reports for our
latest Tuesday
evening Making the Grade series.
It's part
of Public Media's American
Graduate Project.
PATRICK BOCK, SAT Tutor: So,
we're going to
do quadratics today. We're going
to start
quadratics anyway.
APRIL BROWN: For decades, many
students like
junior Carson Goettlicher of
Annandale, Virginia,
have set aside extra time
preparing for a
pre-college ritual, taking the
ACT or the
SAT test, or both. Carson has
been studying
with tutor Patrick Bock for the
new SAT, the
first major changes to the test
since 2005.
CARSON GOETTLICHER, Student: We
took a pretest
in the SAT class which was based
off the old
one. And I did pretty well on
that, so I -- then
I thought about how I'm taking
the new one,
and I'm like, I'm going to do
terrible now.
APRIL BROWN: There are many
changes to the
new version, including a focus
on materials
students are likely to find in
college and
careers. Some test prep
professionals believe
it now looks more like the ACT,
which more
students have taken in recent
years, than
the SAT.
Anyone who has taken the old SAT
might remember
the arcane vocabulary that even
the test creators
admit engendered prodigious
vexation. Those
words are now gone, as is the
penalty for
guessing. The top score on the
test is again
1,600. The essay is now
optional.
The test designers say the
overhaul is meant
to keep the SAT relevant.
JAMES MONTOYA, College Board:
The old test
was working, but this is a
better test.
APRIL BROWN: James Montoya is a
senior vice
president at the College Board,
which oversees
the SATs.
JAMES MONTOYA: We focus on those
skills that
are most important, and
evidence-based reading
and writing is a great example.
If we look
at mathematics, one of the
things that we
look at, the importance of
algebraic equations.
APRIL BROWN: Montoya says the
test is also
more closely aligned to what
students are
learning in school.
Carson Goettlicher is take the
SAT because
the colleges she's applying to
require it,
but since the 1970s, a growing
number of colleges
and universities have made their
admissions
test optional.
Bates College, a liberal arts
school in Maine,
went test-optional in 1984. And
North Carolina's
Wake Forest became one of the
first major
universities to do so in 2008.
Last year,
George Washington University in
Washington,
D.C., became one of the largest
institutions
in the country not requiring SAT
or ACT scores
during the application process.
George Washington vice provost
Laurie Coaler
says test-optional was part of a
plan to help
improve diversity because
studies have revealed
first-generation college-goers,
as well as
minority and female students,
are more likely
to apply if they don't have to
provide standardized
test scores.
LAURIE KOEHLER, Vice Provost,
George Washington
University: We did see a more
than 28 percent
increase in our applications,
but what was
striking was the numbers of
first-generation
students, of under-represented
multicultural
students who submitted
applications, nearly
1,100 more in each of those
populations.
APRIL BROWN: But before the
decision was made,
Koehler says, G.W. looked at
research from
Bates and consulted officials at
Wake Forest
about why standardized test
results may not
be the best predictor of college
success.
They found looking at high
school work holistically
and a student's grade point
average are better
indicators.
LAURIE KOEHLER: If you have
earned C's in
high school, and even if you
test really well,
you're probably going to have
the work habits
that are going to earn you C's
in college.
ROBERT SCHAEFFER, National
Center for Fair
and Open Testing: The changes to
the SAT are
largely cosmetic. They make it a
little bit
more consumer-friendly, but they
don't deal
with any of the fundamentally
flawed characteristics
of the test.
APRIL BROWN: Robert Schaeffer of
the National
Center for Fair and Open Testing
says there
are now more than 850 colleges
and universities
nationwide on the test-optional
bandwagon.
ROBERT SCHAEFFER: It remains a
weak predictor
of how well a student will do in
college.
It's biased in many ways, and
it's susceptible
to high-priced coaching.
APRIL BROWN: The coaching he
refers to can
cost hundreds or even thousands
of dollars
an hour. Carson Goettlicher
found her SAT
tutor Patrick Bock through her
school. It's
something Carson's mother,
Debbie, is thankful
for.
DEBBIE GOETTLICHER, Mother: I'm
trying to
prepare my kids for their
future. And, unfortunately,
they have to take this test in
order for them
to be successful. So, yes, I'm
going to give
them every tool I can. We were
fortunate that
the school actually offered the
program and
made it affordable for us,
because it can
get quite expensive.
MAN: The SAT is changing in
March 2016. Which
SAT do you want to practice for?
APRIL BROWN: In anticipation of
the new SAT,
the College Board partnered with
Khan Academy,
a nonprofit online educational
service, to
provide free test prep.
Founder Sal Khan says it's a way
to level
the playing field for those who
may not be
able to afford extra help.
SAL KHAN, The Khan Academy: The
software in
Khan Academy will immediately
know where you
are strong and where you are
weak, so it can
really do weak-point training.
So, that's
one option. But the number one
thing is not
to pull an all-nighter the night
before the
exam.
APRIL BROWN: Tutor Patrick Bock
and others
have pointed out the new SAT
comes at a time
when the test has been losing
market share
to competitor ACT.
PATRICK BOCK: They can say that
test changes
are motivated by sort of closer
alignment
with state standards or sort of
more rigorous
analytics into the test, but
it's purely a
money thing, right? Like, if
you're losing
students every single year, you
want to make
that up.
APRIL BROWN: Nevertheless, on
Saturday, tens
of thousands of high school
students around
the country woke up early to
take the new
SAT.
JACQUEZ LYKES, Student:
Honestly, I came in
not knowing that it was a
different test.
APRIL BROWN: Jacquez Lykes is a
senior and
took the test in Fairfax County,
Virginia.
Have you taken the SAT before?
JACQUEZ LYKES: Yes. I took it
like three weeks
ago.
APRIL BROWN: What was different
on this new
SAT vs. the old one you took?
JACQUEZ LYKES: The other version
had 10 sections,
and it felt like you were in the
class for,
like, hours or whatnot, and this
one only
had four, which was, like, a
major relief.
APRIL BROWN: Junior Kayla Ramsay
also took
it.
Do you feel like you were
prepared for this?
KAYLA RAMSAY, Student: I do.
Like, I did a
lot of studying and just
recalling stuff from
freshman year, sophomore year.
APRIL BROWN: And we caught up
with Carson
Goettlicher after she finished.
CARSON GOETTLICHER: I'm
relieved. I guess
it felt like pretty much like
any other standardized
test, other than the fact that
there's -- this
is basically our future.
APRIL BROWN: Carson is also
taking the ACT
next month and is planning to
take the new
SAT again in May.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
April Brown in
Fairfax County, Virginia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With all the
noise on the campaign
trail this year about what's
wrong with America,
it caught our eye when
journalist James and
Deborah Fallows filed a report
on places that
seem to be getting things right,
even across
partisan divides.
To find out more, I caught up
with the Fallows
in Greenville, South Carolina.
This story
is part of our collaboration
with "The Atlantic"
magazine.
For the past three years,
husband and wife
journalists James and Deborah
Fallows have
been exploring parts of America
sometimes
referred to as flyover country,
places often
ignored by the East and West
Coast news media.
But instead of just flying over,
the Fallows
have been landing over and over
again.
DEBORAH FALLOWS, "The Atlantic":
When we touched
down in some of these small
communities, you
would think, how can all this be
going on
here, and we never knew about
any of it?
JAMES FALLOWS, "The Atlantic":
The country
is full of people doing things,
which you
wouldn't necessarily assume from
the tone
of political discourse or news
coverage.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a search for
places that
have grappled with challenges,
economic or
political, the Fallows have made
extended
visits to about 25 cities for
the project,
including Greenville, South
Carolina; Burlington,
Vermont; Allentown,
Pennsylvania; Duluth,
Minnesota; Sioux Falls, South
Dakota; Redlands,
California, and so many more.
You found that there were a
number of things
that these cities have in common
that make
things work.
JAMES FALLOWS: You see across
the country,
there's a surprising amount of
the good bones
of downtown that are still left
that people
are trying to use.
You see, very crucially, the
fact that national
politics, which are so divisive
and so poisonous
now, just don't come into the
local discourse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why is having a
downtown important?
JAMES FALLOWS: To a surprising
degree, just
the identity of this is a place
where there's
a there there depends on having
a downtown
with restaurants and with not
just a shopping
mall. It was amazing to go see
how many parts
of the country are attracting
really ambitious,
really well-educated, really
first-rate people
who think that the best arena
for their ambitions
and their whole life prospect is
someplace
where they can do work of the
very first tier,
but also have some effect on the
local community.
The falls are a really nice way
to link the
past and the present.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A prime example,
Greenville,
South Carolina. Once known for
the textile
industry, its mills lined the
Reedy River
in the heart of the city. Now
the mills are
long gone or repurposed, but the
river remains
at the center of the community,
lined by hotels
and restaurants, as it flows
through a stunning
urban park that's a magnet for
tourists and
locals alike.
The evolution was no accident.
KNOX WHITE, Mayor of Greenville,
South Carolina:
We reinvented the downtown, just
as we reinvented
the local economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Knox White, mayor
of Greenville
for more than 20 years, and a
chief architect
of the city's redevelopment,
says city fathers
set out decades ago to plan for
the future.
KNOX WHITE: In the 1970s, when
textiles were
still very viable, the
leadership in Greenville
very intentionally decided that
we needed
to diversify. They brought in
and recruited
companies like General Electric,
and today
GE is a major presence here. And
that put
us in a really good stead,
because, later,
the textile industry would
collapse.
DEBORAH FALLOWS: I think they're
very self-conscious
about what they're doing in
Greenville and
also aware that these things
aren't going
to be decreed from on high.
NANCY WHITWORTH, Director of
Economic Development,
Greenville, South Carolina: It's
just in part
of our DNA of how we operate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Remaking
Greenville took government
and business working together,
says Nancy
Whitworth, Greenville's director
of economic
development.
NANCY WHITWORTH: The
public-private partnership
of working together, the city
and the county,
you see that every day in sort
of how we approach
dealing with companies that we
try to bring
into Greenville.
JUDY WOODRUFF: An active local
government
pushing incentives like tax
breaks and favorable
zoning have made so-called
public-private
partnerships possible, both in
developing
the downtown, and in luring
major manufacturers
to the area, like BMW and
Michelin.
These companies provide tens of
thousands
of jobs, and bring an
international influence
to this small Southern city.
DANIELLE VINSON, Furman
University: It is
definitely conservative, by and
large.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Danielle Vinson
teaches political
science at nearby Furman
University.
DANIELLE VINSON: We have pockets
of Democrats
in the city limits particularly.
But everywhere
else is very Republican. And so
our senators
are Republican. Our -- all of
our congressional
delegation up here is
Republican.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vinson says the
government's
partnership with business may
seem inconsistent
with Republican philosophy, but
it's a way
to make things work.
DANIELLE VINSON: When you start
talking about
ideology, it's good in theory,
and you can
argue about it at the national
level. But
when you get to the local city
and county
level, you have got tangible
issues that have
to be addressed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's no
question Greenville's
economy is booming. Half-a-dozen
cranes dot
the skyline, as new hotels,
condos and office
buildings multiply.
But some are asking if the
benefits have reached
all of Greenville's residents,
about 15 percent
of whom are poor.
How fast is gentrification
happening here?
CHANDRA DILLARD (D), South
Carolina State
Representative: It's happening
very rapidly,
even in my neighborhood.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chandra Dillard
is a Democratic
state representative from
Greenville.
CHANDRA DILLARD: I have received
letters at
my home saying, do you want to
sell? There
is pressure against the
neighborhood.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So how is the
community dealing
with that?
CHANDRA DILLARD: Well, I think
you must be
intentional, Judy. We must be
intentional
about making sure that people
are trained,
that they're ready, that there
is policy to
protect people who currently
live in these
neighborhoods, so that they will
be able to
stay there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How would you
describe today
the racial relationships in this
community,
in the context of the history of
this part
of the state?
CHANDRA DILLARD: I think there
is racial harmony
in our city. Again, I believe
the challenge
now is economic disparity that
separates us,
and not the races.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The congregation
at Greenville's
Redemption Church would seem to
confirm that.
Sixty percent of its 20,000
members are African-American,
the rest mainly white. Most of
the whites
are Republicans, most of the
blacks Democrats.
On politics, they disagree
fiercely. But each
Sunday, they worship as one.
The reverend Ron Carpenter is
their pastor.
REV. RON CARPENTER, Redemption
Church: In
our world, we call it a culture
of honor.
There is such a culture of
disrespect that
prevails in society, I think,
through media,
through government, through
politics, that
I tell people that, no matter if
you disagree
with this person's politics,
whether or not
you agree with their position,
honor the person.
JAMES FALLOWS: It's easier to
treat that person
as somebody who has good parts
and bad parts,
and you disagree on some things,
and you will
try to contain those, where you
can come to
kind of practical solutions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One such solution
addresses
the education gap that keeps
many African-Americans
from sharing in the wealth of
high-tech jobs
in and around Greenville.
At the Whittenberg Elementary
School of Engineering
-- you heard that right,
elementary school
-- these kids get a head start
on math and
science.
DEBORAH FALLOWS: These were the
tiniest little
engineers from pre-K through
grade five. And
they were starting off in
technology and engineering
infused into their baby
curriculum.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the South
Carolina Governor's
School for the Arts and
Humanities, a public
boarding school, gives high
school students
from across the state an
opportunity to pursue
excellence.
Still, much work remains to
spread the new
opportunities and benefits among
all of Greenville's
residents. And much of that work
falls to
the church.
REV. RON CARPENTER: What I do
is, I usually
try to bring businesses and
bring our government
officials to the table and say,
I can't take
care of all of them, but I can
help with this
child care issue if we can get
the Greenville
transit system operating in this
community,
too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Greenville and
in so many
other cities the Fallows
visited, they found
pockets of genuine optimism in a
nation that
often seems filled with fear and
loathing.
JAMES FALLOWS: They have a
shared story about
the way that the city government
works to
bring in some international
corporations,
works with local start-ups,
works with the
diversity of the community
there, works with
religious organizations, and
having some collective
sense that it matters to us to
make this city
attractive, make it inclusive,
make it growing,
make it strong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And did you see
anything that
could be transplanted to
Washington?
JAMES FALLOWS: In contrast to
the apparent
hopelessness of the national
perspective,
there is some attempt to grapple
with these
things locally.
I guess we came across almost
nothing you
could directly say, OK, the
Greenville City
Council works this way. Why
doesn't the U.S.
Senate work this way too? But,
in the meantime,
people in Greenville and Fresno
and Dayton
and Duluth and Allentown and
Central Oregon
and all the rest can learn from
what each
other are doing, and get greater
strength
from that sense of network.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so James and
Deborah Fallows
continue their journey, in the
belief that
these places and others like
them are the
real story of America today,
even more than
what's going on in Washington.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back to
talk with journalist
Peter Bergen about his new book,
"The United
States of Jihad."
But, first, take this moment to
hear from
your local PBS station. It's a
chance to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the newest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf, a look
at Americans
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the newest
addition to
the "NewsHour" Bookshelf, a look
at Americans
inspired by radical jihadism.
Margaret Warner has that.
MARGARET WARNER: Terrorism
expert Peter Bergen
has spent two years studying
hundreds of radicalized
Americans, seeking to understand
what drives
a minority of U.S. Muslims to
wage terror
attacks against their fellow
citizens.
He also takes a hard look at how
law enforcement
has done in identifying and
averting this
danger. The result is his new
book, "The United
States of Jihad: Investigating
America's Homegrown
Terrorists."
It's being released, along with
an HBO documentary
based on it, "Homegrown: The
Counter-Terror
Dilemma."
Peter Bergen, welcome.
So, how big a threat is this,
this homegrown
terrorism?
PETER BERGEN, Author, "United
States of Jihad:
Investigating America's
Homegrown Terrorists":
Well, I think it's a persistent
low-level
threat.
We have been in the United
States quite lucky;
45 Americans have been killed by
jihadi terrorists
in the United States, all by
homegrown militants,
since 9/11. Each one of those
deaths, of course,
is a tragedy, but it's not a
national catastrophe
anything on the scale of 9/11.
So, to some degree, the threat
has been managed,
but it will persist at a low
level for a long
time.
MARGARET WARNER: Was there one
thing you found
in your reporting that united
all these cases,
where you have an American
Muslim who decides
that he wants to kill other
Americans?
PETER BERGEN: One of the things
that's striking
is they're overwhelmingly
Americans. They're
not foreigners coming into this
country to
do terrorist attacks.
They tend to be middle class,
average income,
similar to the average American.
They tend
to be as well-educated as the
average American.
A third are married. A third are
kids, average
age 29. These are not the young
hotheads of
popular imagination.
And, in fact, if you look at the
San Bernardino
case, which, of course, the most
lethal terrorist
attack in the United States
since 9/11, they
were married. They had a child.
The guy was
earning $70,000 a year. They
were basically
living the American dream.
So, it's a big puzzle. Why would
you then
kill your fellow Americans? And
I can't say,
even after two-and-a-half years'
study, that
I can answer that question. I
try, but each
case is individual.
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
So, let's take a couple of the
more obscure
cases.
PETER BERGEN: Yes.
MARGARET WARNER: There was a
young man named
Carlos Bledsoe,
African-American, from a
conservative
Christian upbringing, shoots and
kills a U.S.
soldier at a military recruiting
base in Little
Rock. It seems so unlikely.
PETER BERGEN: He was typical in
the sense
that he comes from a relatively
prosperous
family in Memphis.
He went to college. He dropped
out. He adopted
a very fundamentalist form of
Islam. He decided
to go to Yemen, which is a
hotbed of jihadism.
He seems to have got radicalized
there in
prison, came back, and killed an
American
soldier.
He said in court to the judge
that, you know,
he was guilty, he was sort of
objecting to
American foreign policy.
Now, is that an adequate excuse?
Of course
not, because lots of people
don't like American
foreign policy. They don't kill
people as
a result.
MARGARET WARNER: Zachary
Chesser.
PETER BERGEN: Yes.
MARGARET WARNER: I had never
heard of him.
He starts out -- as a kid, he
wants to be
a U.S. soldier. He ends up
finally being arrested
and convicted of trying to
threaten the creators
of "South Park." But he seemed
to follow a
similar pattern, especially on
the isolation.
PETER BERGEN: There is a sort of
pattern where
people adopt these
fundamentalist views, and
they kind of increasingly seek
out like-minded
people. They kind of withdraw
from society.
They often marry somebody who
shares exactly
their views outside their
previous social
circle.
They -- you know, they basically
are part
a self-reinforcing echo chamber
of people
who share their own views, and
then some may
turn to violence.
Now, Zachary Chesser, he was
inciting violence
in a very real way against the
creators of
"South Park." He could have been
something
very different. He could have
been a Silicon
Valley kid. He was one of the
first people
to really use the Internet for
jihadist purposes.
MARGARET WARNER: That's right.
He became a
big English-language jihadist
blogger. And...
PETER BERGEN: Right. Yes.
If he hadn't had a Somali
girlfriend and got
interested in Islam, he could
have had a very
trajectory.
MARGARET WARNER: This book
focuses a lot on
homegrown and self-radicalized
terrorists.
But there are Americans who are
actively recruited.
PETER BERGEN: Well, luckily,
it's not very
big now, but we have had lots of
Americans
who have gone and become
important members
of al-Qaida.
Think about Anwar al-Awlaki, who
was a well-known
community leader and mosque
leader in Northern
Virginia, who went on to become
a leader of
al-Qaida in Yemen.
MARGARET WARNER: Right.
PETER BERGEN: There are several
examples of
people who have taken senior
leadership positions
in these groups who happen to be
American.
There was an American at the
first meeting
of al-Qaida in 1988 who was a
person taking
notes. He was a guy from Kansas
city. So,
there have been Americans in
al-Qaida or these
groups from the beginning.
MARGARET WARNER: How effective
has U.S. intelligence
and law enforcement been in
containing, of
thwarting this threat?
PETER BERGEN: We have not had
any kind of
major terrorist attack in the
United States
since 9/11.
But people get through. Major
Nidal Hasan
at Fort Hood, who was sort of on
the radar
at the FBI, the FBI sort of
dropped the ball.
Carlos Bledsoe, the guy who
killed a soldier
in Arkansas, he was also on the
FBI's radar.
But the FBI, they can't keep
cases against
people open indefinitely.
MARGARET WARNER: Just for what
they say.
PETER BERGEN: Just for what they
say.
And unless we have a machine
that can read
people's souls, we're not going
to know when
somebody who is an
ultra-fundamentalist becomes
a militant who is going to take
the law into
somebody who is an
ultra-fundamentalist becomes
a militant who is going to take
the law into
their own hands.
MARGARET WARNER: One of the
little-known facts
is that FBI and law enforcement
and intelligence
MARGARET WARNER: One of the
little-known facts
is that FBI and law enforcement
and intelligence
have concocted more terrorist
plots in this
country than all the outside
organizations
like al-Qaida combined.
PETER BERGEN: Yes.
The FBI has done 30. Al-Qaida
and other associated
groups have done 10. And
depending on
your perspective, you can say
that's law enforcement
The FBI has done 30. Al-Qaida
and other associated
groups have done 10. And
depending on
your perspective, you can say
that's law enforcement
overkill.
MARGARET WARNER: What's the
evidence on whether
these alleged perpetrators were
really committed
MARGARET WARNER: What's the
evidence on whether
these alleged perpetrators were
really committed
terrorists or on a path to go
there?
PETER BERGEN: Some of these
cases look a little
like entrapment to, I think, the
outside observers.
PETER BERGEN: Some of these
cases look a little
like entrapment to, I think, the
outside observers.
But the FBI is pretty careful to
always say,
are you really sure you want to
go through
with this? And the perpetrator
usually says
yes.
MARGARET WARNER: Well, Peter
Bergen, author
of "The United States of Jihad,"
thank you.
PETER BERGEN: Thank you,
Margaret.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can find
more of our
book conversations on our Arts
page at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Also on the "NewsHour" online:
For artist
Lisa Friedrich, playing with
fire is just
a part of the artistic process.
Friedrich
makes pyrotechnic art by laying
gunpowder
on paper and setting it aflame
to create a
unique pattern. We have video of
how this
fiery process works.
And
in our weekly jobs column: why
loading your
resume with key words that you
think employers
are looking for is a losing
strategy for job-seekers.
Find out why in our Ask the
Headhunter series.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Pyrotechnic art, I
love it.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
Stay with us online for the
latest on tonight's
elections. That's on our results
page at PBS.org/NewsHour.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
for full analysis of tonight's
results.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.